---
layout: post
title: "The KT88: NYRB Critique 16-17 Series I.i"
date: 2016-11-14 12:00:00
categories: writing essay criticism
render: feature
ex: "Mr. Cui is a Kt88 amplifier. His problems overlap with those of the KT88 he's in the process of installing at the opening of Ge Fei's wonderful Invisibility Cloak: "I worked day and night for two weeks to produce an amplifier that would fit the system, though whether or not it would produce a good sound was by no means certain." (3) Cui is in a constant state of working out how he fits within the context of a social system, and furthermore, to what extent his role in this system is legitimate, "Whether or not it would produce a good sound." Ge Fei's text is a metaphoric exploration of the amplifier, of the ways in which modern individuals are constrained by, and fit into, a system, and how the strictures of this system manifest themselves in one man's struggles of integration with modern Chinese society. Cui's delicately rendered mesh of opinions and recollections exhume a central problem underlying the societal pressures the novel presents: the problem of legitimacy."
---

<h2 class="critique-prelude"> Criticum: </h2>

<p class="critique-work"> Ge Fei. <em>The Invisibility Cloak</em>. Translated by Canaan Morse. New York: New York Review of Books, 2016. Print.</p>

Mr. Cui is a Kt88 amplifier. His problems overlap with those of the KT88 he's in the process of installing at the opening of Ge Fei's wonderful *Invisibility Cloak*: "I worked day and night for two weeks to produce an amplifier that would fit the system, though whether or not it would produce a good sound was by no means certain." (3) Cui is in a constant state of working out how he fits within the context of a social system, and furthermore, to what extent his role in this system is legitimate, "Whether or not it would produce a good sound." Ge Fei's text is a metaphoric exploration of the amplifier, of the ways in which modern individuals are constrained by, and fit into, a system, and how the strictures of this system manifest themselves in one man's struggles of integration with modern Chinese society. Cui's delicately rendered mesh of opinions and recollections exhume a central problem underlying the societal pressures the novel presents: the problem of *legitimacy*.

This underlying question of *legitimacy* is an insistent preoccupation of our narrator and at the heart of the novel's exploration of integration or *fitting*. We may pose the question of legitimacy in the form encapsulating it in the novel: "Am I right?" This question, which Fei employs to a wondrous effect at the novel's conclusion, suggests itself as a constant challenge to Cui's narrative and is the point upon which an overarching concern with legitimacy pivots. Cui's narrative is one of reflections, but one which is clearly intended toward some other. The narrative seeks some form of concession to its analysis of society; seeks the affirmative answer to that legitimizing question. It fishes for sympathy from the reader, posing a host of other questions to engage the reader's process of judgement. Within Cui's narrative, we encounter numerous bleak reflections on modern society such as its containing businessmen with "fat wallets and empty souls" (24), that "Those people with government jobs and lots of money had something to live for, but the lives of people like us really weren't worth anything to begin with" (48), and "If the world's ending, let it end…I didn't have the energy to care about questions [relating to climate change] of such magnitude" (104). Each of these reflections prompts us to ask whether Cui is right--whether we find his view legitimate--and to expand that pivotal "Am I right?" question into the more specific inquiries it conceals: does Cui's narrative fit our own perceptions of the social structures we inhabit? Do we consider Cui's reflections *justified*? Do his views align with our own? Would we, in the same conditions, share Cui's feelings? It is precisely this domain of questions which comprise the desire for legitimacy, and the ways in which this desire operates in modern society. Such questions orbit and stem from the nucleus problem the narrative poses throughout the text: among our contemporaries, what sort of experience is accepted as a legitimate form of life? It takes a talent like Ge Fei's to pack such depth into the reticent, translucent language of this text.

The question of legitimacy functions on a second, localized level within the text. The question bubbles to the surface incessantly through the ways in which Cui's social position locks him into particular alcoves of contemporary society. He ruminates: 

<blockquote>
    <p>The name 'audiophile' has never sat well with me. I'm just a craftsman. It's something I've been proud of, truthfully, for many years. And you know today's craftsman more or less exist on the same rung of the social ladder as beggars. I'm sure certain deep, erudite intellectuals can provide a perfect explanation as to why Chinese society has changed so profoundly in this respect; but if you want a layman's take on it, I'd say the decline we're experiencing began with the deliberate humiliation of of the craftsman. (10) </p>
</blockquote>

We sense Cui's discomfort toward his prescribed societal role in his distaste for the term audiophile. Cui's shift in terminology is significant as it carries a set of conceptual differences in societal relations, status, and function that are implied to fall within Cui's purview. To be labeled audiophile by your peers is an act of dictation spelling out your expected function and designating the subset of people you are to treat as associates within society. To fit this model correctly, or to come close enough, is to live legitimately based on the prescribed views of the society we inhabit. On this level, the question of legitimacy--the judgement given power to designate particular forms of life *as legitimate*--is thus placed in our hands as readers, in the hands of the society Cui inhabits, but not, ultimately, in the hands of Cui. 

The audiophile label is of further operative importance to Cui's narrative because of the way it affects his personal sense of humiliation. If to live legitimately, for Cui, is to align with those ways of life his contemporaries deem worthy, humiliation is legitimacy's antithesis. Humiliation is a sort of defamation stemming from a person's incapacity to fit into societal molds--legitimacy, contrarily, is a state of praise afforded to those whole slide into their societal place with ease. Cui's own inability to meet predefined standards, the source of an internalized humiliation, is elucidated through his love of Beethoven.

One of Cui's clients, his mentor on the ways of the true (read socially defined) audiophile, argues that Beethoven and Hitler are similar in a certain respect: they each signify the death of all forms of life, and importantly *social* life, worthy of praise or respect. In essence, Beethoven and Hitler define the space of *illegitimacy* within their domains--to profess a love of Beethoven among the audiophiles is to commit a certain sin--to break one of the 'thou shall nots' which must be respected to be recognized as a legitimate member of the audiophile's communal space. Cui struggles with a sense of humiliation that arises out of the conflict between his own preferences and those dictums of the audiophile community: "I mulled over what my counselor said for months, and listened to all nine of Beethoven's symphonies, as well as the late quartets, from start to finish. In the end, I had to admit that my life might be beyond hope. It was impossible for me not to like Beethoven." (82) Cui's individuality and the general social type of audiophile he intends to fit are placed into a irresolvable conflict. The social type of audiophile, at least by the client's definition, is composed negatively--to like a particular artist does not make the audiophile, rather a particular set of dislikes, of *thou shall nots*, of negations, define the audiophile's space. In result, there is no happy compromise between Cui's tastes and his desire to fit social prescriptions--one side *must* exclude the other. Cui must forsake his personal tastes, or forsake any dream of legitimacy and acceptance within his community. Such problems arise out of society's ceaseless questioning of the individual's preferences, experiences, and values. The individual must fit like the amplifier; he must have a design which facilitates his integration with the rest of the system and enables him to function within its parameters. Failing this optimization of design, where are we to place the amplifiers that don't fit? There is an obvious space for them, and our own amplifier, Mr. Cui, must struggle with a fear of ending up in the trash heap.

Given this problem of fitting in, the question of legitimacy, Cui develops a desire for a particular solution, one which will effectively enable him to maintain his individuality and remain legitimate in the eyes of society by defusing the conflict: the invisibility cloak. The invisibility cloak obliterates the question of legitimacy by rendering it impossible to ask. The individual is elided by the cloak, but not *effaced*. Fei handles this desire with the same graceful refinement he employs to render Cui's fears: 

<blockquote><p>
    The wildest story I heard was that he could show up at any event unseen because he wore and invisibility cloak. I never witnessed this myself, so I don't know the real story behind it. But Mou Qishan presided as a godfather figure in the hi-fi community… He loved Bartok and Prokofiev--clearly no mere layman's tastes. I met him myself at two such dinners, which ought to dispel the invisibility cloak rumor. (68-69) 
</p></blockquote>

Cui seeks a remedy which enables him to seamlessly fit into society, while remaining, fundamentally, as he is-- he does not want to undergo a literal disappearance or exit the societal space and live as a hermit. Like Mou, he desires to be something of a "godfather figure" within his community. The particular power and status of the godfather is reflected in the life of Mou Qishan: "He liked calligraphy, climbing mountains, and hanging out with female movie stars--all an open secret. Other rumors, however, told of his eccentric, often unpredictable, behavior." (68) Qishan's preferences are importantly an 'open secret'--they do not necessarily fit with the notion of audiophile society defines--rather society determines its prescriptions against Qishan's preferences. The relationship is inverse. Qishan's enjoyments, not his dislikes, define him--we need only contrast this with the counsellor's negatively constituted definition of the audiophile. Qishan, the individual, is strong enough to be the determinate of society's legitimacy through an act of positive self-definition--this is ultimately the relationship with society Cui desires. 

Ge Fei's approach to this question of legitimacy is commendable. The strands of this problem are effectively laid out through the rich detail of Cui's reflections. They never suppress the novel's movement and vividness. The thematic concern of legitimacy is not overlaid onto the novel's content, but rather comes to life and breathes through Fei's wonderful illustrations, perhaps one of the fundamental distinguishing features of well executed literary form. Ge Fei delivers the very experience, the *felt* pressure of this problem of fitting in. 

In the face of the overall excellence of this narrative and thematic development, Ge Fei commits some literary missteps. Toward the end of the novel, the literary form is briefly subordinated to the direct expression of the theme--the novel's world suffers an irruption as Fei makes his point. Ding Caichen's wife is the unfortunate instrument of this forgivable lapse in literary quality. This second Yufen's contributions to the narrative feel far too convenient. This character, stepping out of the ether just as events are getting life-crushingly grim, just so happens to casually brood on those societal issues rendered so delicately through Cui's experiences: "'It only goes to show,' she said, 'that there are forces in this society more terrifying than the mafia.'" (120) The theme hits us so forcefully here we can't help but recoil. To criticize Fei solely for Ding Caichen's wife's meditative predilections is somewhat unfair; it's entirely plausible we might meet characters sensitive to the systematic effects of social life and modernity. However, when we've only recently been introduced and this character's musings are evidently highlighting the general course of problems within the novel's compass, she stands as a sort of *deus ex machina* on the level of theme. More accurately, she is the deus obviated--authorial intent plastered gaudily over the text, a final effort to ensure we 'get it' before the novel's close, and to that effect, a bit demeaning to our literary tastes.  

Ge Fei, nonetheless, expert that he is, recovers from such slips and returns to excellent form by the novel's conclusion. Making masterful use of that legitimizing question, "Am I right?", Fei enacts a sort of reversal--a reposing of this question of legitimacy. Cui's ultimate conclusion on the nature of modern Chinese life, in opposition to the intellectual we encounter in the first chapter, reads: 

<blockquote><p>
    "Do you mind if I contribute my thoughts to this one? If you could just stop nitpicking and dissecting every little thing, if you could learn to keep one eye closed and one eye open, and quit worrying about everything and everybody, you might discover that life is actually pretty fucking beautiful. Am I right?" (125-126) 
</p></blockquote>

Cui's final argument is a challenge to the perspective he delivers throughout the text. Societal mechanisms rupture the individual's sense of authenticity, diminish the individual's freedom, and produce negative feelings, but dwelling on the operation of these societal forces, may be the origin of the question of legitimacy in the first place, and thus the source of society's suppressive power over the individual. Recall the operation of the amplifier: the sounds, or societal pressures, as they occur *unfiltered* are present, but *soft*. The process of *amplification*, which narrative and reflective thought mobilize, produces problems related to fitting into pre-established systems, reiterating the question of legitimacy, the incessant concern as to whether we are accepted and a ceaseless self criticism on that point, until it grows to decibel levels beyond those we can tolerate. A reflective mind such a Cui's cannot avoid noting societal norms and systematic or structural functions, whether acknowledging them as such or not. After all, Colonel Shen remarks that guy's like Cui: "just love dwelling inside your own head." (102) Cui, after reflecting, naturally proceeds to ponder his own integration with the norms and societal patterns he has identified, and the the question of legitimacy, his obsession with his place in society, his humiliation, is born.

Doubtless, Cui spends the majority of the novel preoccupied with what it means to live a legitimate life in Chinese society. Such anxieties are endlessly amplified through the constant life-shaping suggestions of his family and friends (his sister, remember, want to marry him off), his occasional self-loathing, and his more poignant musings on the state of social life in Beijing. At the novel's close however, Cui installs a 300B amplifier in place of the professor's original KT88, a 300B that "didn't really match his [the professor's] Acapella speakers" (125) but which Cui installs regardless. Cui is similarly a poor fit in the social system he inhabits. His marital situation is unorthodox, his profession, by his earlier admission, is respected as much as that of a beggar, and his relationship to his family is fragile if not entirely shattered. In essence, by the close of the novel, Cui's life does not match the specified ideal patterns in multiple social domains: marriage, family, and profession. In spite of this, Cui is quite vehemently opposed to the professor's notion that "no Chinese in today's society could possibly live a truly satisfying life." (125) Cui contrarily finds that it is possible--so long as the the model that life is measured against is one's own, and the project of *legitimacy*, of hoping we produce sounds that are pleasing to the ears of others, is abandoned. The dream of the invisibility cloak is cast aside and, ironically, in that revocation, accomplished. The amplifier mounts to the wall in a skewed manner, the sound quality isn't perfect, here and there we hear an  ear-tickling crackle, and that's a-ok. We have recourse, in our imperfect state, to the words of Cui's wife: "If you tried to live every single detail of your life with perfect clarity, you surely wouldn't even make it through the first day. Try to be perfect and where's the fun?" (125) Where's the fun indeed. We'd be hard pressed to find a sentiment more legitimate. 

