---
layout: post
title: "Cinders"
date: 2016-05-26 12:00:00
categories: fiction 
render: normal
place: Philadelphia
info: This story arose from a focal point exercise for a class on writing fiction. This is the original version. I may rework this story at some future juncture. 
ex: "The sun hung raw and heavy. Pines stood firm in the seething heat, rocks parting their number in sporadic bursts across the ridge. Thick humidity made the air oceanic, in which two animal outlines stood, looking down the one side..."
---
The sun hung raw and heavy. Pines stood firm in the seething heat, rocks parting their number in sporadic bursts across the ridge. Thick humidity made the air oceanic, in which two animal outlines stood, looking down the one side. 

“Well, we’ve done it haven’t we.” 
“Yeah, yeah, take a load off.” 

Henrik swung an arm over a rock. Flat enough to perch on the lower half of it’s side, but converging toward it’s apex as to make a jagged spike unwelcoming lacking clawed feet. Fredrik obliged. He dropped a weathered, singed rucksack next to his seat, pushed pause on the walkman and retired it to a pocket for a while. He leaned back as far as comfort would permit and let the sun brutalize a dirty face. Closed his eyes. 
The place went to ash in a snap. Old Benson’s. Down by the flume. It’s shell dilapidated, standing stark, white beacon of chipping light. Here or there bold bald cypress staking new territory around its edges. Bespoke remoteness.
  
Fredrik opened his eyes, leaned back up and turned to his partner. 
“So you think we’ve got it?”
Henrik still felt cinders in his nose.
“So long as they ain’t got wind of it quite yet.”
Inside mirror of the outer. Benson’d let the place go to hell. Holed curtains. Antiquated stolid chairs and couches laced with regal patterns. Relics of yesteryear. Heaving in thick blankets of dust. Easy kindling. The safe was tucked away in the basement, an otherwise an empty tomb of concrete and mold. Not watchful eye nor vigilant thought once laying upon it as logistics were settled. What to do with the property. How much. Where to ground old Benson. Was there enough room in the cemetery. Cremation was an option. Not a single significant nor specific thought aligned with the contours of that dank sepulcher. The job was easy enough. 

Fredrik cusped a hand over his eyes. 
“You’re not going to take a breather?”
“Nah. Don’t like to sit. Too difficult to get myself motivated for the trek again.”
“Yeah but our lungs took a beating.”
“Feel fine.”
Well, then Henrik would stand. Water hugged the edge of the ridge on it’s eastern slope blending with a bound of sky in the wavy blaze. So, they were a little unlucky, no trees on the east side. Nothing but flittering green and sprouts of brush the way down. That was no place to be. Water wasn’t any less conspicuous. Opened up right into the sea. Plan was clever enough. Point was they got it done. In and out. Torched the place. Even got this far without so much as a stumble. 

“You think we’re good?”
Henrik swiveled the toe of his boot in the rocky dirt. 
“Yeah. Went off just fine.”
Fredrik dusted off his pack a tad and tore away a burnt piece of strap. Looked down the other side of the ridge to a dead pine among the healthy. Solitary outlier. Ignition of that culling instinct. A forester came and sawed it away, leaving a stump. But no. There it stood. Time would come and so would the forester but Fredrik wanted it out now. Withered bark ran along his iris. 

“Why’d I have to light the match, huh”
“What’s that?”
“I said why’d I have to set it off.”
“Speak up.”
“I did so much of it is what I’m saying”
“We’ve been through this.”
Henrik turned to face him but met no engagement. 
“We had to take precautions.”
He starts rubbing and cracking his knuckles. 
“We couldn’t risk trouble, even way out there.”
“But it was dead. There was no one around. Almost seems like you couldn’t do it.”
Humidity pulsates around them. Henrik let off with the knuckle maneuvers and wiped his face. 
“Well. It worked out.”
“Yeah but you didn’t want to do it. That’s why you had me, you didn’t and couldn’t do it but you had the idea.”
“God damn it worked out. Whats wrong with it working out?”
The air increased its weight. Henrik looked toward the water. What a contrast. What a freedom. 
“What’s wrong with it is town’s coming after us and as I see it pinning it on me should be easy. You’re god damn lucky you got me in the thick of it. You’re god damn lucky.”
“Quit worrying about it.”
Fredrik looked at him. Hair raggedly, beard enveloping mouth, aviator stare. 
“I’m not.” 
He got up and stretched. 
“Just think we should get moving.” 
Picking up his pack, he turned in a circle and scoped each side of the ridge. There was activity on the western side, a ways past the thick of pines. A group of about five. A glint among them. 

“Take a look at that there.”
Henrik lifted the aviators an inch and let them fall to rest. 
“Well, what do you need me to do now fella? Want me to go Rambo on the village folk and turn us out of this mess? It’s just fine by me you ought to start running now.”

Henrik watched as they creeped up the ridge. He’d seen them all before. Vaguely. Around town. But he knew none of the bunch. They all had a similar rustic, hardened face. Men normally not determined but playing a sort of game. A get the bad guys game. You could see it. He’d wondered what they had in mind by not calling the cops. Probably retainment of that old territorial spirit. That rock like being. The wanting all mountain things to belong to the men whom lived there and non else. Yes. Rock like. Jutting. Hurling forward. Affixed to the landscape and challenger to all who meant to conquer and navigate its features. 

“Let’s stay put.”
“Stay put?”
Henrik nodded. 
“They’re out for us. This isn’t some gang of boys on a hunting trip.”
“They have nothing.”
“Don’t matter. They know it to be true. They know the sons of bitches Henrik Fairfield and Fredrik Gable brought ruin down on that old bastard’s home and they will do what they can to keep things in a balance and let themselves know none can shape them lest they deem it. They know it and will act.”
“But they are principled.”
Fredrik shook his head and smirked. 
“Well I’m with you.”

They stood waiting the approach of the party. The group hit the top of the ridge within an hour. The sun grew soft and pliable, some of the heat sliding down from the mountain and into the lives of those beset with mosquitoes and the thick summer evening. 

A man with dark hair and a small nose approached them first wielding a hunting rifle, hand clenched firm on the barrel as though it were a scepter, conferrer of power and title. Should it thus serve to bear and project to many his dignified name with the same steady, purposed aspect of his voice.

“Ludolf. As I understand it, you fellas burnt down Benson’s place.”
They remained silent and scanned them. The other men were much the same. Not mean faced but plain. Carpeted with hair. Eyes affixed to their targets. None had intent nor reason to speak. Dictum written in secret inscriptions, encoded in Ludolf’s tones. 

“Now. We had an operation as regards that place. A procedure. You fellas not a fan of procedure?”  
“Course we are. We just thought this was more important.”

So now Henrik would chip in. Fredrik brought his thumb and index together and held before him the ghost of a match. Gone and melted in the concoction of blazing substance they’d heretofore orchestrated. And what was the weight of that? What grand responsibility. And now this. Comparison of measures. What now was the worth of the damaged land and the restructuring of their hunter’s mind? 

“More important? And tell me, son, in what way does the burning of a dead man’s home signify to a mind such as yours importance? No the more, what was so important about stealing a dead man’s money, and dishonoring the so pleasurable company the lot of you deal and rejoin with on daily, who here now have come to fetch you back?” 
So they knew about the money. Henrik was certain it was a secret well kept. One only such efficient and helpful assistants such as himself had won from the old codger. 

“It wasn’t right.”
“What precisely.”
“Auctioning a dead man’s own just because he was dead.”
“Well now. What a notion. You mean to tell me we ought to let the old man manage his estate from heaven?”
Some of the bunch sneered.

“No. But it wasn’t proper. Not like that. There’s some of us deserved more because we were all he’d got.”
“Fine concept indeed son. And whose to say who a man’s got without any kin here nor there for miles? What, we’re supposed to take it on faith you two were the best of pals? Maybe more?”
“Don’t matter how you take it. Wasn’t right.”
“Son you need to read up on the law. There is no right outside the law. Specially here. I don’t need to tell you how we work out here. How here we are alone. If we don’t keep to our own laws and ways we got nothing.”
Evening had begun to settle into the mountains, to nestle itself squarely in the valleys, and blanket it’s reach across the ridge. 

“Well.”
“Look son. I’ll tell you what. Make things right. Respect the law. Just hand it all over and make on your way and w’ll forget about it. The police wont know more than they need. There was a big unfortunate accident at the old man’s keep. No family to stake any claim. It all evens out the way it should.”

Henrik hadn’t taken his aviators off in spite of the dusk. It was all falling apart. it would either stand or fall. It would fall. Fredrik knew it. He gazed along the side of the ridge and traced the curves outlined by the darkened clusters of pine and rock. Natural families settled and locked along the ridge. 

“No.”
“Come on now.”
“No. I don’t give a damn about you law. About your rules. I don’t give a damn if it was all of you saying it and not just him.”
“Fair enough.”

Ludolf drew up the rifle, barrel exit squared at Henrik, finger flirting with the trigger, easing into it now, gaining courage, and finally ramming itself against the curved metal. The roar. Trumpeted signal of restoration of balance. Ruination of nature, tearing of wind by sound not carried but tearing through sky, heat, atmosphere. Ludolf had a frown on his face and pointed the barrel to Fredrik, who handed over the bag.

Night eliminated the humidity. Fredrik couldn’t find the moon. Cursed under his breath. Waited till they left then began to make for his own way. There it was, aviators and everything. He stared at it for a moment. What a stupid thing he did. What a waste. Pointless. Clenched his jaw and listened for remnants. Last tracings of that fiendish sound. Stared at the aviatored thing. Quiet. What a stupid thing. He spat on it and shook his head. Under the trees he dreamed of silent explanations and mossy guideposts leading nowhere. 