---
layout: post
title: "The Bluff"
date: 2016-05-26 12:00:00
categories: fiction
render: normal
place: Philadelphia
info: This story arose from an exercise for a class on writing fiction. This is the original version. I may rework this story in the future. The omissions in the narrative enable the imagination to exercise. 
ex: "So there go the boys, battling, as they might. As you do at that age—good practice. Sticks bashing away. Al’s got the upper hand on Bernard most of the time. The waves crashing at the base and all, I’m sure they felt strong in the nature. I was glad I brought em out with me. So I let them battle until Bernard fell off. "
---

So there go the boys, battling, as they might. As you do at that age—good practice. Sticks bashing away. Al’s got the upper hand on Bernard most of the time. The waves crashing at the base and all, I’m sure they felt strong in the nature. I was glad I brought em out with me. So I let them battle until Bernard fell off. 

I was scanning through the binocs and there was this nice great white—beautiful bird. Rare scene and everything, he had a fish, standing there at the bottom of the bluff, on the rocky sand. I looked down at ‘im with my eyes, then binocs, then eyes. I called on the boys to have them take a look, and I saw they had gotten near the drop. No danger. Just natural like the heron. Then Al comes up to me.

Pa, he says, you’ve got to get Bernard. Al’s concerned and I wondered when I’d gotten concerned and where’s it gone and why I can’t fish it out. So I go over and take a look down and there’s the kid sitting, scratched up—no harm in that. Only kids and nature. Fish like the egret. So I told Al to get ‘im. 

When I bring them back Bridget’s all upset. I explain to her and she says I always do this and to grow up and then she tends to Bernard. The boys can take it, I say. Hell, the kids had a grand time. Bernard’s banged up but no worse. Just kids and nature.

September 8. Caleb’s Bend.—Great White Heron. 
Spotted at the foot of the bluff w/ al & b.
Fight with Bridget. 

I look at ‘im from the edge. The only soul around. I can see ‘im as he is. See his whites long and stark ‘gainst the sand and sea. In the quiet his portent of what is belonging. 