---
layout: post
title: "Three Conditions for a Definition of Science"
date: 2016-03-19 12:00:00
categories: writing philosophy essay feature
related: Parapet for the Pauper Form and Counterform
abstract: This piece explores three potential conditions for a definition of science.
ex: "Determining what science actually is reigns the foremost problem philosophy of science ought to try to answer. Some approaches are more successful than others, and some more readily fit the descriptive pictures of science we intuitively construct. Perhaps, however, a philosophy of science ought to offer not only a descriptive, but a normative answer to the question “what is science,” suggesting not only what science currently is, but what it ought to be. Normative definitions of science consider science in its own right, regardless of current practice, and hold science to a particular standard. Definitions which are descriptive in nature consider the daily practices we label scientific and the communities responsible for them. Let us consider some of the answers philosophers have provided to the question, and see if we can forge a balanced definition of science, which provides both a descriptive and normative account..."
---
> **Note:** I wrote this essay in the spring of 2015 and presented it at the 2016 Annual Greater Philadelphia Consortium Philosophy Undergraduate Conference. I'm hoping to make improvements to the piece in the future. Currently I'm still working out the best means of presenting bibliographic information as well as inline notes via jekyll, so for now the notes to the piece are left out and the minuscule works cited is present at the end. 

Determining what science actually *is* reigns the foremost problem philosophy of science ought to try to answer. Some approaches are more successful than others, and some more readily fit the descriptive pictures of science we intuitively construct. Perhaps, however, a philosophy of science ought to offer not only a descriptive, but a normative answer to the question “what is science,” suggesting not only what science currently is, but what it ought to be. Normative definitions of science consider science *in its own right*, regardless of current practice, and hold science to a particular standard. Definitions which are descriptive in nature consider the daily practices we label scientific and the communities responsible for them. Let us consider some of the answers philosophers have provided to the question, and see if we can forge a balanced definition of science, which provides both a descriptive and normative account. 

##Introduction

Karl Popper’s distinction of the scientific from the unscientific is a normative distinction we might find intuitively agreeable; at least prior to further consideration. Popper defines the scientific as that which “has the potential to be refuted by some possible observation” (Godfrey-Smith 58). For instance, my notion that ‘all swans are red’ is a refutable scientific proposition (of course such a bold claim does not seem at all scientific to our immediate sensibilities, which we will get to later). A swan’s being red or any color is a readily observable phenomena. We only require one trustworthy sighting of a single non-red swan to refute my proposition—thus proceeds Popper’s cycle of conjecture and refutation—I conjectured that all swans are red, a single non-red swan refuted the claim, and now we can move forward scientifically by positing a new refutable conjecture. 

Popper’s delineation of the scientific from the unscientific, while useful, does not manage to provide a full picture of science alone. There is for Popper’s distinction, a holism problem: “Whenever we try to test a theory by comparing it to observations, we must make a large number of additional assumptions…so how can we really use observations to falsify theories in the way Popper wants?” (Godfrey-Smith 64). In other words, how can we be certain the observed non-red swan was really non-red and the observer’s eyes weren’t playing a trick on him?  What if our instruments malfunction? There is an apparent social problem related to the distinction as well. Publishing a theory that all swans are red without utilizing prior knowledge in the realm of biology would likely be deemed ridiculous by those within, and even those outside of, the realm of practicing biologists. That we ought to make and tentatively accept conjectures, and that they ought to be falsifiable is fair enough—but there are some clear prerequisites, and, in most cases, pre-established paths one must follow before being recognized as a scientist. Were my theory generally correct, it might come to be accepted even if I lacked scientific renown; however, this is unlikely—and most of the conjectures and refutations we consider scientific come from those who are already recognized as scientists. There seems to be a social aspect to what we’d commonly consider science that is missing from Popper’s distinction of the scientific from the unscientific. Popper’s scientist can operate as a sort of lone ranger, who conceives and refutes his own theories using his astounding aversion to conviction. 

In order to improve our definition of science from this point, we can turn to the theory of Thomas Kuhn, which brings to the fore the sort of social aspects of science Popper’s notion did not account for. Kuhn’s conception of science highlights that it is a domain clearly marked by social divisions and constraints. Scientists, for Kuhn, are those that work within a given paradigm, a set of fundamental beliefs and methodologies members of a given scientific community agree upon. Peter Godfrey-Smith views Kuhn’s position as quite different from Popper’s; however, if we consider both positions carefully, and reconfigure the scope of Popper’s model of conjecture and refutation, we may find Kuhn’s and Popper’s concepts in harmony after all. Of course, I must first note that Popper himself would disagree with what I am about to put forth. What follows is a *reconfiguration* of his notions. Popper’s ideal scientist questions everything, as Godfrey-Smith surmises: “Popper’s view does hold that a good scientist is permanently open minded with respect to *all* issues in the field in which he or she is working,” (Godfrey-Smith 81). Contrarily, Kuhn noted that scientists using a paradigm had to assume some fundamental beliefs in order to conduct research. Now, let’s rework Popper’s and Kuhn’s ideas slightly to form a firmer normative definition of science that also serves to be adequately descriptive. It is a delicate task: our definition must be normative enough that we may distinguish the scientific from the unscientific, but not so extreme as to nullify the scientific progress we have made thus far; for clearly we have gotten some results. 

Consider Kuhn’s notion of the paradigm and Popper’s notion of falsification. According to Kuhn, a paradigm is a theoretical framework scientists communally apply and in so doing either refine or, once the paradigm begins to fail to account for phenomena, abandon. In the situation in which a new paradigm must come forth (termed crisis by Kuhn), there must be some *criterion* for determining which paradigm, out of a competing set, should be chosen by the scientific community. For Kuhn, a paradigm’s superior problem solving ability (Godfrey-Smith 89) determines its acceptance. This seems like a good enough descriptive conception of the paradigm—surely we can conceive of scientists accepting a new paradigm because it manages to account for the phenomena a previous theory did not. However, I think we are in a better position to provide a normative conception of science if we retain Kuhn’s paradigm but treat it in a Popperian sense: that is, the paradigm ought to (a.) be a conjecture, and (b.) be falsifiable. This may seem a little strange—how can what is effectively a complex of fundamental beliefs and methodologies be a conjecture? 

If we consider a paradigm to be a bundle of fundamental conjectures, and the methodology arising out of said bundle as those tools which render further conjectures, and in the extreme case the fundamental conjectures, refutable, we can conveniently conceive of the whole thing as a sort of major conjecture. One implication of such a conception is that a paradigm is falsified as a whole—a failure at one point in the bundle of conjectures is a failure for the entire paradigm, and one change of a part results in a change of the whole. The upshot of this is that it is easier to class certain paradigms as unscientific and to determine that they are such, even if they seem to be solving problems a previous paradigm could not. If one of the fundamental conjectures in the bundle is unfalsifiable by the paradigm’s methods, then we must question if the paradigm is truly one of a scientific sort. We can solve many problems. It is not always the case that in thus solving them, we partake in the scientific. 

Now that we have synthesized, somewhat, the ideas of Popper and Kuhn, let us handle an obvious element of science, which neither philosopher directly addresses, and which pertains to the scientific community. To be considered a scientist, in most cases, consists in part of holding something which signifies its owner as having learned a particular set of concepts. The clearest example of this is a Bachelor of Science degree; though in truth anything which signifies a person's having learned concepts through some formal system of training, and having competency in a given field suffices. We may add an additional caveat that one also needs to actively participate in research activities within a community of similarly trained colleagues. Therein the average fellow on the street, even if he conducts experiments in his house or backyard, is not, at least in the public eye, considered a scientist. 

In the same vein not every degree and academic activity pertains to science. The scientific degree is a token of having come to learn concepts of a particular kind. But what kind is this? We can explore a bit further and consider what one earning a Bachelor of Science studies. Surely, the degree is supposed to show that one has competence in current methodologies in the field of study as well as at least a general knowledge of the field’s historical development. We can consider this training, in Kuhnian terms, to be training in the current paradigm of the field. To expand on Kuhn’s view, we may emphasize that the paradigm is used by a *community* of scientists trained through a *formal system*. This helps assuage the holism problem to a degree. Formalized systems of training lower the chances that a paradigm may be incorrectly applied and yield faulty results. Of course, our holism issue is not at all entirely resolved, especially since other factors still remain. 

But if science is to be a community of individuals trained in the use of a paradigm through a formal system, how do we determine which paradigms are scientific? We may again invoke Popper’s notion of falsifiability to retain a division between the sciences and the arts, and to assure a paradigm in use by a given community, arising out of a formal system, is one that is scientific. In distinguishing science from other systems, we ought to examine a particular community, which we can call a *field*, and check that it meets a few criteria: (1.) That its members are using an identical bundle of conjectures, called a paradigm, which determines their methodology, as well as the set of phenomena they study. (2.) That all of its members have proven their acquisition of the paradigmatic methodologies and conjectures, as well as their competency in applying methodologies, through a formal system of training. (3.) That the methodologies of the paradigm render its conjectures falsifiable, and that the paradigm is not applied in such a fashion as to render all results of its application infallible. 

If one of the prior conditions is not met, it is questionable as to whether or not our subject can be considered science. If more than two of these conditions are not met, it is either highly unlikely what is being practiced is scientific, or it is likely that it is not a science *yet*. A blossoming scientific field may have a community, a bundle of conjectures, and a methodology but may not have a formal system for the training of new practitioners. Once this system is established, we might consider our field a full-fledged science. If none of the conditions are met, it is clear that our field is not scientific. For example, consider a grossly simplified version of the field of literary theory. As to criterion (1.), literary theory boasts divisions in paradigmatic application. Some practitioners utilize marxist theory, some psychoanalysis; both of which have distinct methodologies. There is not a clearly defined single paradigm (unified bundle of conjectures and methodologies which enable the refutation of said conjectures) that the literary theory community uses. 

Yet why not consider this dual application of marxism and psychoanalysis a unification of these schools of thought; a synthesized paradigm, but a singular paradigm nonetheless? In order to clear up this trouble with paradigm distinction, let us specify that the conjectures included in the bundle *must implicate each other*. The conjectures included in the set must concern themselves with subject matter related enough to have direct implications on the other conjectures, without the use of *connective or synthetic conjectures*. We can suggest implications between marxism and psychoanalysis, but the falsification of the conjectures of one do not immediately effect the conjectures of the other. We can reconsider class struggle without having to reconsider our conjectures regarding the id and the ego. The phenomena studied in each case may be studied independently of the other paradigm. An observation in one of the paradigms does not refute the other unless we posit further conjectures equating the phenomena of one study to the other; we’d need something like ‘the proletariat class is necessitated by the structure of the ego of its members.’ The conjectures, for them to be considered part of a singular paradigm, must all deal with the same basic set of phenomena and predicates. 

As to condition (2.), it is difficult to ascertain what would constitute proper formal training in our version of literary theory precisely because it is not clear what set of conjectures and methodologies are requisite. Are new members adequately trained if all they know is how to conduct marxist readings, or must they also acquire the ability to render fully realized psychoanalytic readings of a text? What paradigm does the normal literary theory scientist learn?

Regarding condition (3.), we find that it is tricky to falsify any of the competing readings in our literary theory, nor, as mentioned prior, do the competing paradigms directly effect one another well, and thus our literary theory is, by our conditions, not a science. To wrap up with our little example, let us diagnose why our version of literary theory seems to be unscientific in terms of this exploration. It is perhaps, due to a large amount of focus and effort on *synthetic conjecture* in the field. The set of phenomena studied in our literary theory goes beyond the text. The linguist studies linguistic phenomena. The marxist studies social phenomena. The literary theorist, contrarily, has a foot in each of these two separate domains of phenomena. It may be that our literary theory example is not a science because this bridging operation is quite difficult. It is the joining of separate domains of inquiry in which we often run into difficulty.  

In sum, we have developed three criteria by which we may define science. Furthermore, the criteria can be used as a sort of scale, to determine the current status of a field which has the *potential* to become scientific given further development. Ultimately our definition will need to be either proved or disproved with a thorough examination of the history of science. Indeed, I suggest it is even likely that there are quite a few instances that would disprove it, or at the very least suggest it needs to be reformed. We have here set down a preliminary. There are further nuances, such as the notion of scientific progress that need to be addressed. With these weaknesses in mind I hope I have, at the very least, provided a basis by which we might begin conceiving of a definition of science which is both descriptive and normative and which entails both its social aspects as well as constraints that should avoid including anything which we normally would not consider science, science. 

##Works Cited

Godfrey-Smith. Theory and Reality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003. Print.